adding istio tracing to the tracing documentation (#16394)
kyma-project/kyma: docs/01-overview/main-areas/telemetry/telemetry-03-traces.md

    http-backend      Ready     44s
    ```

> ### Step 2. Enable Istio Tracing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2. Enable Istio tracing
```

> ### Step 2. Enable Istio Tracing

Reviewer: If you want to use the word `Step`, please add it to point **1. Create a TracePipeline with an output.** Otherwise, please remove the word from the remaining points. I recommend the second option :)

Author: Nina introduced it.. want to keep ot consistent with logging guide

> By default, the tracing feature of the Istio module is disabled to avoid increased network utilization in case of an absent of a TracePipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the tracing feature of the Istio module is disabled to avoid increased network utilization in the case of the TracePipeline absence.
```

> To activate the [Istio tracing](#istio) feature with a sampling rate of 100% (not recommended on production), place a resource like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To activate the [Istio tracing](#istio) feature with a sampling rate of 100% (not recommended on production), use a resource similar to the following:
```

  password: XXX
```

### Step 6: Rotate the Secret

As used in the previous step, a Secret referenced with the **secretKeyRef** construct can be rotated manually or automatically. For automatic rotation, update the Secret's actual values and keep the Secret's keys stable. TracePipeline watches the referenced Secrets and detects changes, so the Secret rotation takes immediate effect. When using a Secret owned by the [SAP BTP Operator](https://github.com/SAP/sap-btp-service-operator), you can configure `credentialsRotationPolicy` with a specific `rotationFrequency` to achieve an automated rotation.

## Kyma Components with tracing capabilities

> Kyma bundles several modules which are potentially involved in user flows and with must propagate the trace context properly and optional provide custom spans.

Reviewer: Is this sentence complete? Can you elaborate on its meaning?

Author: I improved it. I agree that a general explanation of the topic would help. That would need to be done in the intro. I might add it at a later time.

> Kyma bundles several modules which are potentially involved in user flows and with must propagate the trace context properly and optional provide custom spans.

Author: ```suggestion
Kyma bundles several modules which are potentially involved in user flows. Applications involved in a distributed trace must propagate the trace context to keep the trace complete, optional they can enrich the trace with custom spans which requires to report them to the backend.
```

### Istio

> The Istio module plays a crucial aspect in a distributed trace as the module provides the ingress gateway where usually requests from external are entering the cluster scope and will be enriched with trace context if that did not happen yet. Furthermore, every components being part of the Istio Service Mesh is running an Istio Proxies which propagates the context properly but also creates span data. Having Istio tracing activated and doing trace propagation in your application will already assure that you will get a complete picture of a trace as every component will contribute span data automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Istio module is crucial in a distributed trace as it provides [ingress gateway](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/ingress-control/) where usually external requests enter the cluster scope and are enriched with trace context if it hasn't happened yet. Furthermore, every component being part of the Istio Service Mesh is running an Istio proxy, which propagates the context properly but also creates span data. Having Istio tracing activated and doing trace propagation in your application already ensures that you will get a complete picture of a trace, as every component will automatically contribute span data.
```

> The Istio module is crucial enabler in distributed tracing as it provides [ingress gateway](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/ingress-control/) where usually external requests enter the cluster scope and are enriched with trace context if it hasn't happened yet. Furthermore, every component being part of the Istio Service Mesh is running an Istio proxy, which propagates the context properly but also creates span data. Having Istio tracing activated and doing trace propagation in your application already ensures that you will get a complete picture of a trace, as every component will automatically contribute span data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Istio module is a crucial enabler in distributed tracing as it provides [ingress gateway](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/ingress-control/) where usually external requests enter the cluster scope and are enriched with trace context if it hasn't happened yet. Furthermore, every component being part of the Istio Service Mesh is running an Istio proxy, which propagates the context properly but also creates span data. Having Istio tracing activated and doing trace propagation in your application already ensures that you will get a complete picture of a trace, as every component will automatically contribute span data.
```

> The Istio module is configured with an [ExtensionProvider](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/observability/telemetry/) called `kyma-traces`. The provider can be activated on global mesh label using the Istio [Telemetry API](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/telemetry/#Tracing) by placing a resource to the istio-system namespace like that:

Reviewer: ExtensionProvider is this how it's written? I don't see any example in the linked doc. Maybe an `extension provider` would be sufficient?

Author: ```suggestion
The Istio module is configured with an [extension provider](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/observability/telemetry/) called `kyma-traces`. The provider can be activated on global mesh label using the Istio [Telemetry API](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/telemetry/#Tracing) by placing a resource to the istio-system namespace like that:
```

> The Istio module is configured with an [ExtensionProvider](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/observability/telemetry/) called `kyma-traces`. The provider can be activated on global mesh label using the Istio [Telemetry API](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/telemetry/#Tracing) by placing a resource to the istio-system namespace like that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Istio module is configured with an [ExtensionProvider](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/observability/telemetry/) called `kyma-traces`. The provider can be activated on the global mesh label using the Istio [Telemetry API](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/telemetry/#Tracing) by adding a resource to the `istio-system` Namespace, for example:
```

> The Istio module is configured with an [extension provider](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/observability/telemetry/) called `kyma-traces`. The provider can be activated on global mesh label using the Istio [Telemetry API](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/telemetry/#Tracing) by placing a resource to the istio-system namespace like that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Istio module is configured with an [extension provider](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/observability/telemetry/) called `kyma-traces`. The provider can be activated on the global mesh label using the Istio [Telemetry API](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/telemetry/#Tracing) by placing a resource to the istio-system namespace like that:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: telemetry.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: tracing-default
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  tracing:
  - providers:
    - name: "kyma-traces"
```

> That will configure all Istio proxies with the `kyma-traces` extension provider which by default will report span data to the trace collector of the telemetry module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It configures all Istio proxies with the `kyma-traces` extension provider, which by default, reports span data to the trace collector of the telemetry module.
```

> Be aware of, that by default the samplingRate is configured to 1 percent. That means that only 1 trace out of 100 traces will be reported to the trace collector, all others will be dropped. Hereby, the sampling decision itself gets propagated as part of the [trace context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#sampled-flag) so that either all involved components are reporting the span data of a trace or none. Turning up the sampling rate will increase the network utilization in the cluster a lot and also will increase the amount of data send to your tracing backend. Usually a very low percentage around 5% are getting used in a productive setup to reduce costs and performance impacts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be aware that by default, `samplingRate` is configured to 1 percent. That means that only 1 trace out of 100 traces is reported to the trace collector, and all others are dropped. Hereby, the sampling decision itself gets propagated as part of the [trace context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#sampled-flag) so that either all involved components are reporting the span data of a trace or none. Increasing the sampling rate results in much higher network utilization in the cluster and also increases the amount of data sent to your tracing backend. Usually, a very low percentage of around 5% is used in a production setup to reduce costs and performance impacts.
```

> To configure an "always-on" sampling, you will need to configure a sampling rate of 100% by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure an "always-on" sampling, you need to configure a sampling rate of 100% by:
```

> Be aware that by default, that the sampling rate is configured to 1 percent. That means that only 1 trace out of 100 traces is reported to the trace collector, and all others are dropped. Hereby, the sampling decision itself gets propagated as part of the [trace context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#sampled-flag) so that either all involved components are reporting the span data of a trace or none. Increasing the sampling rate results in much higher network utilization in the cluster and also increases the amount of data sent to your tracing backend. Usually, a very low percentage of around 5% is used in a production setup to reduce costs and performance impacts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be aware that by default, the sampling rate is configured to 1 percent. That means that only 1 trace out of 100 traces is reported to the trace collector, and all others are dropped. Hereby, the sampling decision itself gets propagated as part of the [trace context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#sampled-flag) so that either all involved components are reporting the span data of a trace or none. Increasing the sampling rate results in much higher network utilization in the cluster and also increases the amount of data sent to your tracing backend. Usually, a very low percentage of around 5% is used in a production setup to reduce costs and performance impacts.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: telemetry.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: tracing-default
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  tracing:
  - providers:
    - name: "kyma-traces"
    randomSamplingPercentage: 100.00
```

> Selectively, namespaces or workloads can be configured with individual settings by placing further resources. To not report spans at all for a specific workload, the `disableSpanReporting` flag can be activated using a selector expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Namespaces or workloads can selectively be configured with individual settings by placing further resources. To not report spans at all for a specific workload, the `disableSpanReporting` flag can be activated using the selector expression.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: telemetry.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: tracing-default
  namespace: my-namespace
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      kubernetes.io/name: "my-app"
  tracing:
  - providers:
    - name: "kyma-traces"
    randomSamplingPercentage: 100.00
```

### Eventing

> The Kyma [eventing](./../../main-areas/eventing/README.md) component dispatches events from an in- or out-cluster backend to your workload. Hereby, it is leveraging the [cloudevents](https://cloudevents.io/) protocol which natively supports [W3C Trace Context] propagation. Having that said, the veneting component already propagates trace context properly, however does not enrich a trace with more advanced span data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Kyma [eventing](./../../main-areas/eventing/README.md) component dispatches events from an in- or out-cluster backend to your workload. Hereby, it is leveraging the [cloudevents](https://cloudevents.io/) protocol which natively supports [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context) propagation. Having that said, the eventing component already propagates trace context properly, however does not enrich a trace with more advanced span data.
```

> The Kyma [eventing](./../../main-areas/eventing/README.md) component dispatches events from an in- or out-cluster backend to your workload. Hereby, it is leveraging the [cloudevents](https://cloudevents.io/) protocol which natively supports [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context) propagation. Having that said, the eventing component already propagates trace context properly, however does not enrich a trace with more advanced span data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kyma [Eventing](./../../main-areas/eventing/README.md) component dispatches events from an in- or out-cluster backend to your workload. Hereby, it is leveraging the [cloudevents](https://cloudevents.io/) protocol which natively supports the [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context) propagation. That said, the Eventing component already propagates trace context properly but does not enrich a trace with more advanced span data.
```

### Serverless

> All engines for the [Serverless](./../../main-areas/serverless/README.md) runtime are integrating the [Open Telemetry SDK](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/metrics/sdk/) by default. With that, trace propagation will not your concern anymore as the used middlewares are configured to propagate the context for chained calls automatically. By having the Telemetry endpoints configured by default, it also reports custom spans for incoming and outgoing requests. With the provided [tooling](./../../../03-tutorials/00-serverless/svls-12-customize-function-traces.md), more spans can be added easily as part of your Serverless source code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All engines for the [Serverless](./../../main-areas/serverless/README.md) runtime integrate the [Open Telemetry SDK](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/metrics/sdk/) by default. With that, trace propagation will no longer be your concern, as the used middlewares are configured to automatically propagate the context for chained calls. By having the Telemetry endpoints configured by default, it also reports custom spans for incoming and outgoing requests. With the provided [tooling](./../../..///03-tutorials/00-serverless/svls-12-customize-function-traces.md), more spans can be easily added as part of your Serverless source code.
```

### Single TracePipeline support

Only one TracePipeline resource at a time is supported at the moment.

## Frequently Asked Questions

1. Traces are not arriving at the destination at all

>   - Check the `telemetry-trace-collector` pods for error logs by calling `kubectl logs -n kyma-system <pod-nam>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Check the `telemetry-trace-collector` Pods for error logs by calling `kubectl logs -n kyma-system {POD_NAME}`
```

>   - Check at the monitoring dashboard for kyma telemetry if data gets exported

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Check the monitoring dashboard for Kyma telemetry if the data gets exported
```

  - Verify that you activated Istio tracing

> 1. Custom spans are not arriving at the destination, but istio spans do arrive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Custom spans are not arriving at the destination, but Istio spans do
```

>   - Verify that you are using an SDK version for instrumentation which is compatible with the otel-collector version used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Verify that you are using the SDK version for instrumentation that is compatible with the otel-collector version used
```
